A discussion of riches often centers on the danger of making material wealth the main
thing in our life.
Our text today is about riches, but the focus is on how we use the things that we possess.
Let's go back to our text at Luke chapter 16, verse 9, and read it once again.
It says, also, I say to you, make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous
riches so that when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.
There are certain aspects of this text that some have found difficult to understand.
For example, why would a Christian even be in possession of unrighteous riches?
Who are referred to by the pronoun they?
Also what application is there in this illustration for us?
To clarify matters, it will help us to look at the context.
Verses 1 through 8 of Luke chapter 16 contain the illustration of the steward and unrighteous
riches.
Verses 9 to 13 provide the application of the illustration.
And that application includes the principles that the person faithful in least is faithful
in much, and also we cannot slave for God and for riches.
To learn how we can benefit from this teaching of Jesus, let's consider three things.
First of all, we will examine the illustration.
Second, we will identify the elements, and third, we'll make the application.
So first of all, let's examine the illustration.
If we look at Luke chapter 16, verse 1, it talks about a steward.
If we look at the footnote, it says this could be a house manager, so it is someone who's
entrusted with a good deal of responsibility.
And it says that he is accused of handling his master's goods wastefully.
Now the wording of that verse allows for the possibility that the steward was slandered.
It's possible the charges were false.
But Jesus doesn't focus on the reason for the steward's dismissal.
Rather, he gives attention to the steward's reaction.
Jesus's 2-7 shows the reasoning of the steward knowing that he's going to be fired.
He says, I'm not strong enough to dig, I'm ashamed to beg, so how am I going to make
a living?
So he decides to be friend ones who owe things to his master.
One debtor owes 100 measures of olive oil, so the steward reduces that debt to 50 measures.
That's a reduction of nearly 300 gallons of olive oil.
Another debtor owes his master 100 large measures of wheat.
He reduces that to 80.
That's a reduction of 4,000 quarts of wheat.
That's a substantial reduction in the debt.
Then if we look at verse 8, the master, on finding out what the steward is done, calls
him unrighteous, and yet he commends him for acting with practical wisdom.
So here Jesus is not condoning or endorsing the steward's methods.
Nor is he encouraging crafty business practices.
Jesus simply draws attention to the need to be far-sighted and to use practical wisdom.
Now let's identify the elements.
We come to our text verse 9, where it tells us to use our unrighteous riches to make friends.
Jesus doesn't explain in detail why he refers to the riches as unrighteous.
However, the new international version gives us a hint when it calls the unrighteous riches
worldly wealth.
In other words, the unrighteous riches represent material resources under the control of sinful
humans.
These often serve selfish ends, and they may be gained through crafty or even illegal
business practices.
Then Jesus states a reality.
He says, when such fail, yes, the value of material wealth is limited and it's temporary.
It can be eaten away by inflation.
Consider the value of one U.S. dollar 50 years ago.
If you had $100 in 1969, you would need $692 today to have the same purchasing power.
In 1969, a gallon of gas costs 32 cents, a loaf of bread costs 23 cents.
Yes, riches fail, and they will definitely fail in the future.
Verse 18 says, neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the
day of Jehovah's fury.
During the Great Tribulation, we're not going to be judged based on the size of our bank
account.
Rather, we're going to be judged based on our storehouse of spiritual riches that we
have accumulated, and that leads to the meaning of the latter part of verse 9.
It says that they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.
What or who is referred to by the word they?
Is it the riches?
Certainly not.
They're temporary.
They're going to fail.
We have to go back earlier in the verse to find the antecedent, and it is the word friends.
So who are these friends?
Please open your Bibles to John chapter 3, verse 16.
There are only two possibilities of individuals who can give us everlasting dwelling places,
and they're identified here in this verse, John chapter 3, verse 16.
It says, for God loved the world so much that He gave His only begotten Son so that everyone
exercising faith in Him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.
Yes, only God, Jehovah and His Son, Jesus Christ, can usher us into everlasting dwelling
places, whether that be the heavenly kingdom or the paradise earth.
Now let's make application of this illustration.
How do we use the material things of this world to make friends with Jehovah and Jesus?
Everything we own actually belongs to them, however each one of us has a measure of money
and material assets that we are free to use as we please.
So to make friends with Jehovah and Jesus, we have to use those things in a way that brings
their approval.
Our contributions don't have to be in the form of cash.
In Jesus' illustration, the debt was olive oil and wheat.
The unrighteous riches might even be coconuts.
A brother in southern India owns a coconut farm.
He contributed a large number of coconuts to a local to the local remote translation office.
He reasoned the office is going to have to spend money and buy coconuts so His supplying
the coconuts directly would help His contribution go further than it would if He sold the coconuts
and gave the office the cash that is practical wisdom.
Now if we go back to Luke chapter 16, let's look at verse 10.
Here it's interesting that the principle of the person faithful in what is least will
be faithful in much was given in the context of our use of material riches.
So we cannot take this responsibility lightly.
Notice what it says in verse 11.
It says, therefore, if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous
riches, who will entrust you with what is true?
Yes, the way we use our monetary riches or goods will affect the extent to which the
things that are true such as kingdom interest are entrusted to us.
Therefore, let's remember the key point of Jesus illustration of the unrighteous steward.
No matter how much or how little of this world's goods we have under our control, we want
to use them to strengthen our relationship with our best friends, Jehovah and Jesus.